---
layout: event
title: MLE 2019
date: September, 2019, Munich, Germany
---

<style type="text/css">
  ul li ul {
    margin-top: 0;
  }
</style>

<div style="text-align: center;" markdown="1">


# International Workshop on Modeling Language Engineering and Execution (MLE): 

# *The joint Fifth International Workshop on Executable Modeling (EXE)* 

# *and Seventh International Workshop on the Globalization of Modeling Languages (GEMOC)*

## September, Munich, Germany, co-located with [MODELS 2019](http://www.modelsconference.org/)

<strong>[About]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link events/mle2019.md %}#about-the-workshop)  |  [Program]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link events/mle2019.md %}#program)  |  [Call]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link events/mle2019.md %}#call-for-papers--models)  |  [Dates]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link events/mle2019.md %}#important-dates)  |  [Committees]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link events/mle2019.md %}#committees)</strong>


</div>


## About the Workshop

MLE 2019 is a brand new MODELS workshop resulting from the merger of two recurring MODELS workshops, namely GEMOC and EXE! Accordingly, it will be a full-day workshop that brings together researchers and practitioners in the modeling languages community to discuss the challenges associated with the engineering of modeling languages, with executability, and with integrating multiple, heterogeneous modeling languages. The languages of interest include both general-purpose and domain-specific languages with topics ranging from the requirements, design, and implementation of languages that may or may not be executable. 

Following the previous editions of the GEMOC and EXE workshops, the objective is to continue collaborations and to expand on the two overlapping communities that are focused on solving problems arising both from the globalization of modeling languages − i.e., the use of multiple DSLs to support coordinated development of diverse aspects of a system − and the problems related to the executability of modeling languages  − i.e., defining, composing, verifying and tooling the execution semantics of DSLs. MLE 2019 will provide an open forum for sharing experiences, problems, and solutions on all these topics. This workshop will be the place where concrete artifacts, ideas, and opinions are exchanged in order to gather constructive feedback.



## Program

TBA.



## Keynote

The keynote will be given by [Vadim Zaytsev](http://grammarware.net/),  Chief Science Officer of [Raincode](https://www.raincode.com/) and [Raincode Labs](https://www.raincodelabs.com/).

Title and abstract TBA.


## Call for Papers

### Context 

The increasing complexity of modern software-intensive systems demands enhanced software engineering methods. Separation of concerns of the diverse stakeholders’ facilitates the coordinated development of system aspects implementing these concerns. These different concerns are often associated with specialized description languages and technologies, which are based on concern-specific problems and solution concepts. Executable modeling languages, for instance, are increasingly used to provide abstractions of a system’s behavior, and to perform early analyses of that behavior. Hence, software developers are faced both with the challenging task of engineering each separate modeling language and associated technologies and with the task of integrating the different languages from different concern spaces.

### Topics

The topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

-  Tools and methods for engineering modeling languages (eg. DSLs)
-  Defining, composing, verifying and tooling the execution semantics of modeling languages
-  Composability and interoperability of heterogeneous modeling languages
-  Heterogeneous modeling and simulation
-  Tools and methods for the dynamic validation, verification of systems (e.g., model animation, testing debugging, simulation, tracing, trace exploration, model checking, symbolic execution)
-  Tools and methods to deal with the different system aspects and to ensure consistency and coherence between the different models
-  Execution and composition of partial and underspecified models
-  Language interface, viewpoint
-  Multi-language or multi-disciplinary environment
-  Model execution and composition in the presence of non-determinism and concurrency
-  Tools and methods for socio-technical coordination in the context of heterogeneous modeling
-  Language integration challenges, from requirements to design, for analysis and simulation, during runtime, etc.
-  Surveys and benchmarks of different approaches for the development of modeling languages


Submissions describing practical and industrial experience related to the use of executable and/or heterogeneous modeling languages are also encouraged, particularly in the following application domains:

-  Cyber-Physical Systems, System of Systems
-  Internet of Services, Internet of Things
-  Complex Adaptive Systems
-  Smart City, Smart Building, Home automation


### Workshop Format

The format of the workshop reflects the goals of the workshop: constructive feedback on submitted papers and other artifacts on the engineering or use of modeling languages, collaborations, and community building. The format of the workshop is that of a working meeting. Hence, there is less focus on presentations and more focus on producing and documenting a research content that identifies challenges, different forms of language engineering and integration, and relates existing solutions.

The workshop consists of a morning session in which a keynote and short presentations of the accepted papers will be given. A significant amount of time will be reserved for discussing each paper and their relations to each other. The afternoon session is devoted to a working session dedicated to open discussions of the presented contributions and other topics suggested by the participants. The closing session is dedicated to develop a plan to publish the results of the discussion in a final workshop report.


### Submission

The following types of submissions are solicited:

- Research papers (up to 8 pages)
- Short papers (up to 4 pages)

As contributions, we expect early research results about the aforementioned topics, descriptions of problems, case studies, experience reports or solutions related to the topics of interest. We also strongly encourage the submission of comparative studies and benchmarks of existing approaches in one of the topics. Short papers can also describe tool demonstrations or position papers. 

Papers that describe use cases or novel approaches can be accompanied by concrete artifacts, such as models (requirements, design, analysis, transformation, composition, etc.), stored in a public repository. Artifacts should illustrate any experience on the conjoint use of different modeling languages.


All submissions have to follow the [the IEEE format] (https://www.ieee.org/conferences/publishing/templates.html) and must be [submitted electronically in PDF format via Easychair](https://easychair.org/my/conference?conf=mle2019). 

All submissions will be evaluated by at least three members of the program committee. Research papers, experience reports, and tool demonstration papers will be evaluated concerning novelty, correctness, significance, readability, and alignment with the workshop call. Position papers will be evaluated primarily concerning the validity and the ability to generate discussion (even controversy), as well as alignment with the workshop call. Furthermore, all submissions must be original work and must not have been previously published or being under review elsewhere.

The accepted papers will be published as IEEE online proceedings and indexed in DBLP and Scopus.


## Important Dates

- Abstract submission deadline: June 28, 2019
- Paper submission deadline: July 5, 2019
- Notification of acceptance: July 28, 2019
- Workshop: September 2019


## Committees

### Organizers ([contact](mailto:mle2019@easychair.org))

- [Erwan Bousse](https://bousse-e.univ-nantes.io/), University of Nantes, France
- [Julien Deantoni](http://i3s.unice.fr/~deantoni), University of Nice, France
- [Romina Eramo](http://people.disim.univaq.it/romina.eramo/), University of L'Aquila, Italy
- [Jeff Gray](http://gray.cs.ua.edu/), University of Alabama, USA
- [Ed Seidewitz](https://www.linkedin.com/in/seidewitz), Model Driven Solutions, USA


### Program Committee

- Bernhard Rumpe, RWTH Aachen University 
- Taylor Riche, National Instruments 
- Florian Noyrit, CEA LIST 
- Steffen Zschaler, King's College London 
- Andrei Chiș, feenk gmbh 
- Gunter Mussbacher, McGill University 
- Jean-Michel Bruel, IRIT 
- Manuel Wimmer, Johannes Kepler University Linz 
- Thomas Degueule, CWI 
- Federico Ciccozzi, Mälardalen University 
- Hans Vangheluwe, University of Antwerp and McGill University 
- Hugo Bruneliere, NaoMod Team (IMT Atlantique & LS2N - CNRS) 
- Andreas Wortmann, RWTH Aachen University 
- Mark Van Den Brand, Eindhoven University of Technology 
- Jérémie Tatibouët, CEA 
- Benoit Combemale, University of Toulouse & Inria 
- Tony Clark, Aston University 
- Safouan Taha, CentraleSupelec 
- Matthias Schöttle, McGill University 
- Nicolas Hili, IRT Saint Exupéry